---
draft: true
slug: understanding-what-observability-is
title: Understanding what Observability is
date: 2022-12-20T19:00:00Z
image: ''
tags:
- '4'
description: ''

---
Observability is a term that is commonly used in the field of software engineering and refers to the ability to understand the internal state of a system based on its external outputs. It is an important concept that allows engineers to monitor and diagnose the performance and behavior of their systems, and to identify and fix issues before they become major problems.

Observability is typically achieved through the use of three main pillars: metrics, logging, and tracing. These pillars work together to provide a comprehensive view of the system and to enable engineers to understand and improve its behavior.

## Logging

Logging refers to the process of recording events and messages generated by a system. These logs can include information about system errors, performance issues, user actions, and other important events. Logs are typically stored in a central location, such as a log server or cloud storage, and can be searched, filtered, and analyzed to identify and understand the causes of issues.

## Metrics

Metrics are numerical measurements of the performance and behavior of a system. Examples of metrics include the number of requests per second, the average response time, and the number of errors. Metrics are often collected in real-time and displayed in graphs or dashboards, allowing engineers to quickly and easily identify trends and patterns in the data.

## Tracing

Tracing refers to the process of tracking the flow of a request through a distributed system. This can include information about the different components, services, and networks that the request touches, as well as the time it takes for the request to be processed. Tracing allows engineers to see the full picture of how a request is handled, from end to end, and to identify bottlenecks and other performance issues.

Together, these three pillars of observability provide a comprehensive view of a system and enable engineers to understand and improve its behavior. By implementing observability, engineers can monitor and diagnose issues in real-time, and take proactive steps to prevent and fix problems before they impact users.